README.md, before:

# NetBox Panorama ConfigPump Plugin

A NetBox plugin that synchronizes configurations from NetBox to Palo Alto Networks Panorama with a pull → diff → push workflow.

![Concept](images/Panorama-ConfigPump-concept.svg)

## Overview

This plugin enables you to declare Panorama configuration in NetBox, render it from NetBox objects using [Configuration Templates](https://netboxlabs.com/docs/netbox/models/extras/configtemplate/) in [Panorama XML format](https://docs.paloaltonetworks.com/ngfw/api/getting-started), preview the diff, and stage changes to Panorama.

- **Configuration synchronization**: Keeps [Panorama Templates](https://docs.paloaltonetworks.com/panorama/11-1/panorama-admin/panorama-overview/centralized-firewall-configuration-and-update-management/templates-and-template-stacks) and [Device Groups](https://docs.paloaltonetworks.com/panorama/11-1/panorama-admin/panorama-overview/centralized-firewall-configuration-and-update-management/device-groups) in sync.
- **Declarative updates**: Full-template and device-group **overwrites** in a single, deterministic operation by default (you can optionally specify more precise XPaths to replace).
- **Inline diff UI**: Uses [Monaco Editor](https://github.com/microsoft/monaco-editor) to display XML diffs before you push.
- **Background jobs**: All long-running sync operations are executed asynchronously.
- **Flexible updates**: Easily overwrite Panorama Templates and Device Groups, or target arbitrary XML-API paths using XPath expressions defined per firewall device.
- **Automatic commit**: Push now acquires config and commit locks, uploads the rendered XML, loads defined XPath targets, commits, polls the job, and exports the resulting config.

<div align="center">
  <img src="images/second_push.png" alt="NetBox Panorama ConfigPump UI screenshot" style="max-width: 100%; height: auto;" />
</div>

## Introduction video
[![Watch the video](https://img.youtube.com/vi/9GfsvGQwZU0/maxresdefault.jpg)](https://youtu.be/9GfsvGQwZU0)


## Concepts

- **Config Template**: Jinja + XML template that renders device-specific Panorama XML using NetBox data. See: [examples/v11.1.6/template_example.xml.j2](examples/v11.1.6/template_example.xml.j2)
- **Connection Template**: Defines how to connect to a Panorama instance (host, token reference, defaults).
- **Connection**: Binds devices to a specific Panorama instance and orchestrates pull/diff/push for those devices.

## Quickstart

1. Create firewall `Device` objects in NetBox.
2. Create a **Config Template** (Jinja + XML) that renders Panorama XML from your NetBox data.
3. Create a **Connection Template** for your Panorama instance (host + token key).
4. Create a **Connection**, assign devices, then open it to view the generated XML and diff.
5. Pull candidate config from Panorama to refresh the diff.
6. Push to upload and commit changes in Panorama. The plugin handles locks, loads configured XPaths, commits, and polls until completion.

Refer to [EXAMPLES.md](EXAMPLES.md) for screenshots of each step.

> [!CAUTION]
> When you push configuration from NetBox using Panorama ConfigPump, any Panorama templates and device groups defined in the rendered config for a device are **completely overwritten** in Panorama. In other words, ConfigPump takes full ownership of those specific templates and device groups. Any manual changes made directly in Panorama to them will be lost on the next push. However, you can also perform targeted per-firewall XPath updates that modify only the specified XML paths to avoid full configuration overwrites.
>
> To avoid losing manual configurations, keep any manually managed settings in **separate** templates and device groups that are not managed by ConfigPump. You can combine both manual and NetBox-managed configurations by using Panorama’s Template Stacks and Device Group Hierarchy features.

> [!NOTE]
> If you are deploying in brownfield environment the NetBox generated XML elements might be in different order compared to what is already in Panorama. Because of this you will see same elements to be removed and added. Good news is when you push configs to Panorama, it repects the order they are pushed. This means the problem will dissapear after first push. Nevertheless, go carefully through all the diffs before pushing.

### Commit behavior

- **Locks**: On push, the plugin first verifies there are no uncommitted changes or existing locks, then takes both a config lock and a commit lock with a descriptive comment containing the NetBox change ID.
- **Upload**: The rendered configuration (validated and normalized XML) is uploaded to Panorama as a file.
- **XPath load**: The plugin loads the uploaded file into Panorama using partial replace mode for each configured XPath. XPaths are, by default, deduced from the rendered XML for `template` and `device-group` entries, or you can provide manual XPath entries per device.
- **Commit**: Performs a full commit with the same change description, captures a commit job ID, and polls until the job reports success.
- **Export**: After a successful commit, the latest Panorama configuration matching the configured XPaths is exported back and stored to keep the diff up to date.
- **Failure handling**: If any step fails, the plugin reverts the candidate configuration when applicable, removes locks, and exports the latest Panorama config to resync state.

> [!NOTE]
> When Load Partial is used via XML-API, Panorama [requires](https://docs.paloaltonetworks.com/panorama/11-1/panorama-admin/manage-firewalls/transition-a-firewall-to-panorama-management/load-a-partial-firewall-configuration-into-panorama) Full commit by superuser. This is why Panorama Token needs to be generated by user with superuser rights.

## Compatibility

Tested combinations:

| Plugin Version | NetBox Versions   | Panorama versions |
|:--------------:|:-----------------:|:-----------------:|
|      1.0.6     |   4.2.5 - 4.3.7   |  10.2.10, 11.1.6  |
|      1.0.5     |   4.2.5 - 4.3.7   |  10.2.10, 11.1.6  |
|      1.0.4     |   4.2.5 - 4.3.7   |  10.2.10, 11.1.6  |
|      1.0.3     |   4.2.5 - 4.3.7   |  10.2.10, 11.1.6  |
|      1.0.2     |   4.2.5 - 4.3.7   |  10.2.10, 11.1.6  |
|      1.0.1     |   4.2.5 - 4.3.7   |  10.2.10, 11.1.6  |
|      1.0.0     |   4.2.5 - 4.3.7   |  10.2.10, 11.1.6  |

## Installation

1. Install the plugin in the NetBox environment:
   ```bash
   pip install netbox-panorama-configpump-plugin
   ```

2. Enable the plugin in NetBox `configuration.py`:
   ```python
   PLUGINS = [
       "netbox_panorama_configpump_plugin",
   ]

   PLUGINS_CONFIG = {
       "netbox_panorama_configpump_plugin": {
           # minimal example — see CONFIGURATION.md for all options
           "default_request_timeout": 60,
           "default_filename_prefix": "netbox-panorama",
           # Store tokens in env vars or your secrets manager
           "tokens": {
               "PANO1_TOKEN": os.environ.get("PANO1_TOKEN"),
           },
           "top_level_menu": True,
       }
   }
   ```

3. Restart NetBox (and workers) to load the plugin.

For detailed configuration options, see [CONFIGURATION.md](CONFIGURATION.md).

## Development

See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for local setup, make commands, testing, and debugging.

## Known limitations

- Monaco Editor assets are currently loaded from a CDN. If the NetBox UI cannot reach the Internet, the diff view will not load. Bundling the assets locally may be added later.

## Security notes

- Do not store Panorama authentication tokens directly in `configuration.py`. Load them from environment variables or a secret manager and pass them via `PLUGINS_CONFIG["netbox_panorama_configpump_plugin"]["tokens"]`.

## License

This project is licensed under the Apache License Version 2.0 — see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Third-Party Licenses

This project uses the Monaco Editor, licensed under the MIT License.
Monaco Editor © Microsoft Corporation: https://github.com/microsoft/monaco-editor

## Support

- **Repository**: [GitHub](https://github.com/rautanen-io/netbox-panorama-configpump-plugin)
- **Issues**: [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/rautanen-io/netbox-panorama-configpump-plugin/issues)
- **Author**: [rautanen.io](https://www.rautanen.io)

If you need assistance creating custom connection templates, feel free to [contact us](mailto:jaakko@rautanen.io).

## Changelog

See the [Releases](https://github.com/rautanen-io/netbox-panorama-configpump-plugin/releases) page for version history and changes.

## Sponsorship

If you find this plugin useful and want to sponsor ongoing development or integrate NetBox‑driven configuration for switches and routers, please [contact us](https://www.rautanen.io). We also provide ConfigPumps for Cisco and Arista switches and routers.

## Disclaimer

This plugin is developed and maintained by independent contributors. It is not an official Palo Alto Networks product, nor is it affiliated with, endorsed, or supported by Palo Alto Networks in any way. Use at your own discretion.

Commit message:

Document known limitations for Panorama integration
Added known limitations regarding Panorama template handling and interface bindings.

README.md, after:

# NetBox Panorama ConfigPump Plugin

A NetBox plugin that synchronizes configurations from NetBox to Palo Alto Networks Panorama with a pull → diff → push workflow.

![Concept](images/Panorama-ConfigPump-concept.svg)

## Overview

This plugin enables you to declare Panorama configuration in NetBox, render it from NetBox objects using [Configuration Templates](https://netboxlabs.com/docs/netbox/models/extras/configtemplate/) in [Panorama XML format](https://docs.paloaltonetworks.com/ngfw/api/getting-started), preview the diff, and stage changes to Panorama.

- **Configuration synchronization**: Keeps [Panorama Templates](https://docs.paloaltonetworks.com/panorama/11-1/panorama-admin/panorama-overview/centralized-firewall-configuration-and-update-management/templates-and-template-stacks) and [Device Groups](https://docs.paloaltonetworks.com/panorama/11-1/panorama-admin/panorama-overview/centralized-firewall-configuration-and-update-management/device-groups) in sync.
- **Declarative updates**: Full-template and device-group **overwrites** in a single, deterministic operation by default (you can optionally specify more precise XPaths to replace).
- **Inline diff UI**: Uses [Monaco Editor](https://github.com/microsoft/monaco-editor) to display XML diffs before you push.
- **Background jobs**: All long-running sync operations are executed asynchronously.
- **Flexible updates**: Easily overwrite Panorama Templates and Device Groups, or target arbitrary XML-API paths using XPath expressions defined per firewall device.
- **Automatic commit**: Push now acquires config and commit locks, uploads the rendered XML, loads defined XPath targets, commits, polls the job, and exports the resulting config.

<div align="center">
  <img src="images/second_push.png" alt="NetBox Panorama ConfigPump UI screenshot" style="max-width: 100%; height: auto;" />
</div>

## Introduction video
[![Watch the video](https://img.youtube.com/vi/9GfsvGQwZU0/maxresdefault.jpg)](https://youtu.be/9GfsvGQwZU0)


## Concepts

- **Config Template**: Jinja + XML template that renders device-specific Panorama XML using NetBox data. See: [examples/v11.1.6/template_example.xml.j2](examples/v11.1.6/template_example.xml.j2)
- **Connection Template**: Defines how to connect to a Panorama instance (host, token reference, defaults).
- **Connection**: Binds devices to a specific Panorama instance and orchestrates pull/diff/push for those devices.

## Quickstart

1. Create firewall `Device` objects in NetBox.
2. Create a **Config Template** (Jinja + XML) that renders Panorama XML from your NetBox data.
3. Create a **Connection Template** for your Panorama instance (host + token key).
4. Create a **Connection**, assign devices, then open it to view the generated XML and diff.
5. Pull candidate config from Panorama to refresh the diff.
6. Push to upload and commit changes in Panorama. The plugin handles locks, loads configured XPaths, commits, and polls until completion.

Refer to [EXAMPLES.md](EXAMPLES.md) for screenshots of each step.

> [!CAUTION]
> When you push configuration from NetBox using Panorama ConfigPump, any Panorama templates and device groups defined in the rendered config for a device are **completely overwritten** in Panorama. In other words, ConfigPump takes full ownership of those specific templates and device groups. Any manual changes made directly in Panorama to them will be lost on the next push. However, you can also perform targeted per-firewall XPath updates that modify only the specified XML paths to avoid full configuration overwrites.
>
> To avoid losing manual configurations, keep any manually managed settings in **separate** templates and device groups that are not managed by ConfigPump. You can combine both manual and NetBox-managed configurations by using Panorama’s Template Stacks and Device Group Hierarchy features.

> [!NOTE]
> If you are deploying in brownfield environment the NetBox generated XML elements might be in different order compared to what is already in Panorama. Because of this you will see same elements to be removed and added. Good news is when you push configs to Panorama, it repects the order they are pushed. This means the problem will dissapear after first push. Nevertheless, go carefully through all the diffs before pushing.

### Commit behavior

- **Locks**: On push, the plugin first verifies there are no uncommitted changes or existing locks, then takes both a config lock and a commit lock with a descriptive comment containing the NetBox change ID.
- **Upload**: The rendered configuration (validated and normalized XML) is uploaded to Panorama as a file.
- **XPath load**: The plugin loads the uploaded file into Panorama using partial replace mode for each configured XPath. XPaths are, by default, deduced from the rendered XML for `template` and `device-group` entries, or you can provide manual XPath entries per device.
- **Commit**: Performs a full commit with the same change description, captures a commit job ID, and polls until the job reports success.
- **Export**: After a successful commit, the latest Panorama configuration matching the configured XPaths is exported back and stored to keep the diff up to date.
- **Failure handling**: If any step fails, the plugin reverts the candidate configuration when applicable, removes locks, and exports the latest Panorama config to resync state.

> [!NOTE]
> When Load Partial is used via XML-API, Panorama [requires](https://docs.paloaltonetworks.com/panorama/11-1/panorama-admin/manage-firewalls/transition-a-firewall-to-panorama-management/load-a-partial-firewall-configuration-into-panorama) Full commit by superuser. This is why Panorama Token needs to be generated by user with superuser rights.

## Compatibility

Tested combinations:

| Plugin Version | NetBox Versions   | Panorama versions |
|:--------------:|:-----------------:|:-----------------:|
|      1.0.6     |   4.2.5 - 4.3.7   |  10.2.10, 11.1.6  |
|      1.0.5     |   4.2.5 - 4.3.7   |  10.2.10, 11.1.6  |
|      1.0.4     |   4.2.5 - 4.3.7   |  10.2.10, 11.1.6  |
|      1.0.3     |   4.2.5 - 4.3.7   |  10.2.10, 11.1.6  |
|      1.0.2     |   4.2.5 - 4.3.7   |  10.2.10, 11.1.6  |
|      1.0.1     |   4.2.5 - 4.3.7   |  10.2.10, 11.1.6  |
|      1.0.0     |   4.2.5 - 4.3.7   |  10.2.10, 11.1.6  |

## Installation

1. Install the plugin in the NetBox environment:
   ```bash
   pip install netbox-panorama-configpump-plugin
   ```

2. Enable the plugin in NetBox `configuration.py`:
   ```python
   PLUGINS = [
       "netbox_panorama_configpump_plugin",
   ]

   PLUGINS_CONFIG = {
       "netbox_panorama_configpump_plugin": {
           # minimal example — see CONFIGURATION.md for all options
           "default_request_timeout": 60,
           "default_filename_prefix": "netbox-panorama",
           # Store tokens in env vars or your secrets manager
           "tokens": {
               "PANO1_TOKEN": os.environ.get("PANO1_TOKEN"),
           },
           "top_level_menu": True,
       }
   }
   ```

3. Restart NetBox (and workers) to load the plugin.

For detailed configuration options, see [CONFIGURATION.md](CONFIGURATION.md).

## Development

See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for local setup, make commands, testing, and debugging.

## Known limitations

- Monaco Editor assets are currently loaded from a CDN. If the NetBox UI cannot reach the Internet, the diff view will not load. Bundling the assets locally may be added later.
- There are multiple practical limitations due to how Panorama handles templates, such as:
  - In panorama different configuration sections of virtual-router cannot be splitted into multiple templates. This means you need either generate all configurations of the template from NetBox or utilize the functionality which allows only specific XPaths to be overwritten by NetBox generated configs.
  - If you want to bind interfaces to zones (or virtual-systems, virtual-routers) using ConfigPump, all interfaces for those zones needs to come from NetBox. This is because of there is single list under zone for interface bindings.

## Security notes

- Do not store Panorama authentication tokens directly in `configuration.py`. Load them from environment variables or a secret manager and pass them via `PLUGINS_CONFIG["netbox_panorama_configpump_plugin"]["tokens"]`.

## License

This project is licensed under the Apache License Version 2.0 — see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Third-Party Licenses

This project uses the Monaco Editor, licensed under the MIT License.
Monaco Editor © Microsoft Corporation: https://github.com/microsoft/monaco-editor

## Support

- **Repository**: [GitHub](https://github.com/rautanen-io/netbox-panorama-configpump-plugin)
- **Issues**: [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/rautanen-io/netbox-panorama-configpump-plugin/issues)
- **Author**: [rautanen.io](https://www.rautanen.io)

If you need assistance creating custom connection templates, feel free to [contact us](mailto:jaakko@rautanen.io).

## Changelog

See the [Releases](https://github.com/rautanen-io/netbox-panorama-configpump-plugin/releases) page for version history and changes.

## Sponsorship

If you find this plugin useful and want to sponsor ongoing development or integrate NetBox‑driven configuration for switches and routers, please [contact us](https://www.rautanen.io). We also provide ConfigPumps for Cisco and Arista switches and routers.

## Disclaimer

This plugin is developed and maintained by independent contributors. It is not an official Palo Alto Networks product, nor is it affiliated with, endorsed, or supported by Palo Alto Networks in any way. Use at your own discretion.
